[PowerToys] Add documentation about Desired State Configuration (#4930)
MicrosoftDocs/windows-uwp: hub/powertoys/dsc-configure.md

---
title: PowerToys DSC Configure module
description: DSC configure module documentation for PowerToys
ms.date: 04/03/2024
ms.topic: article
no-loc: [PowerToys, Windows, DSC, Win]
---

# DSC configuration

> Since version 0.80, PowerToys installer is released on GitHub with `Microsoft.PowerToys.Configure` [DSC resource](/powershell/dsc/overview) that allows you to configure PowerToys using a [Winget configuration file](/windows/package-manager/configuration/create).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since version 0.80, the PowerToys installer has been released on GitHub with `Microsoft.PowerToys.Configure` [DSC resource](/powershell/dsc/overview) that allows you to configure PowerToys using a [Winget configuration file](/windows/package-manager/configuration/create).
```

> Since version 0.80, PowerToys installer is released on GitHub with `Microsoft.PowerToys.Configure` [DSC resource](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/dsc/overview?view=dsc-2.0) that allows you to configure PowerToys using a [Winget configuration file](../package-manager/configuration/create).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since version 0.80, PowerToys installer is released on GitHub with `Microsoft.PowerToys.Configure` [DSC resource](/powershell/dsc/overview) that allows you to configure PowerToys using a [Winget configuration file](/windows/package-manager/configuration/create).
```

## Installation

> ### Prerequisites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Prerequisites

```

> - `PSDesiredStateConfiguration` 2.0.7 or higher: Refer to the [PowerShell DSC documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/dsc/overview?view=dsc-2.0) for installation instructions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `PSDesiredStateConfiguration` 2.0.7 or higher: Refer to the [PowerShell DSC documentation](/powershell/dsc/overview) for installation instructions.
```

- PowerShell 7.2 or higher.
- WinGet [version v1.6.2631 or later](https://github.com/microsoft/winget-cli/releases).

### Download

> `Microsoft.PowerToys.Configure` is [installed alongside PowerToys](install.md). Depending on the installer type, it is installed as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Microsoft.PowerToys.Configure` is [installed alongside PowerToys](install.md). Depending on the installer type, it's installed as follows:

```

> `Microsoft.PowerToys.Configure` is [installed alongside PowerToys](./install). Depending on the installer type, it is installed as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Microsoft.PowerToys.Configure` is [installed alongside PowerToys](install.md). Depending on the installer type, it is installed as follows:
```

- For the per-user install scope, the module is located in `%USERPROFILE%\Documents\PowerShell\Modules\Microsoft.PowerToys.Configure`.

> - For the machine-wide install scope, it is found in `%ProgramFiles%\WindowsPowerShell\Modules\Microsoft.PowerToys.Configure`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For the machine-wide install scope, it's found in `%ProgramFiles%\WindowsPowerShell\Modules\Microsoft.PowerToys.Configure`.
```

## Usage

You can invoke the resource directly using the following syntax:

```ps
Invoke-DscResource -Name PowerToysConfigure -Method Set -ModuleName Microsoft.PowerToys.Configure -Property @{ Awake = @{ Enabled = $false; Mode = "TIMED"; IntervalMinutes = "10" } }
```

However, creating a configuration.dsc.yaml file that contains the required settings in a simpler format is more convenient. Here's an example:

```yaml
properties:
  resources:
    - resource: Microsoft.WinGet.DSC/WinGetPackage
      directives:
        description: Install PowerToys
        allowPrerelease: true
      settings:
        id: PowerToys (Preview)
        source: winget

    - resource: PowerToysConfigure
      directives:
        description: Configure PowerToys
      settings:
        ShortcutGuide:
          Enabled: false
          OverlayOpacity: 50
        FancyZones:
          Enabled: true
          FancyzonesEditorHotkey: "Shift+Ctrl+Alt+F"
        FileLocksmith:
          Enabled: false
  configurationVersion: 0.2.0
```

> The configuration file can be executed as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the following command to apply the configuration from the file:
```

```ps
winget configure .\configuration.dsc.yaml
```

> This command installs the latest version of PowerToys and then uses the PowerToysConfigure resource to apply various settings for multiple PowerToys modules. More examples can be found [here](https://github.com/microsoft/PowerToys/tree/main/src/dsc/Microsoft.PowerToys.Configure/examples).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command installs the latest version of PowerToys and uses the PowerToysConfigure resource to apply settings for multiple PowerToys modules. More examples can be found [here](https://github.com/microsoft/PowerToys/tree/main/src/dsc/Microsoft.PowerToys.Configure/examples).
```

## Available Configuration Settings by Module

### AlwaysOnTop

| Name | Type | Description | Available |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Enabled | Bool | The enabled state for this utility | ✅ |
| Hotkey | KeyboardKeys | Customize the shortcut to pin or unpin an app window | ✅ |
| FrameEnabled | Bool | Show a border around the pinned window | ✅ |
| FrameThickness | Int | Border thickness in pixels | ✅ |
| FrameColor | String | Specify a color in a #FFFFFFFF format or  | ✅ |
| FrameOpacity | Int | Border opacity in percentage | ✅ |
| FrameAccentColor | Bool | Whether to use a custom FrameColor value | ✅ |
| SoundEnabled | Bool | Play a sound when pinning a window | ✅ |
| DoNotActivateOnGameMode | Bool | Disable activation shortcut when Game Mode is on | ✅ |

> | ExcludedApps | String | '\r'-separated list of executable names to exclude from pinning on top. | ✅ |

Reviewer: You should either have periods at the end of each description or none of them. My preference would be to use them on each line.

| RoundCornersEnabled | Bool | Enable round corners | ✅ |

### Awake

| Name | Type | Description | Available |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Enabled | Bool | The enabled state for this utility | ✅ |
| KeepDisplayOn | Boolean | This setting is only available when keeping the PC awake | ✅ |

> | Mode | AwakeMode | Possible values: PASSIVE INDEFINITE TIMED EXPIRABLE  | ✅ |

Reviewer: Add separators between the possible values. Commas should be fine.

> | IntervalHours | UInt32 | When using TIMED Mode, specifies the amount of hours | ✅ |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| IntervalHours | UInt32 | When using TIMED Mode, specifies the number of hours. | ✅ |
```

> | IntervalMinutes | UInt32 | When using TIMED Mode, specifies the amount of minutes | ✅ |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| IntervalMinutes | UInt32 | When using TIMED Mode, specifies the number of minutes. | ✅ |
```

> | ExpirationDateTime | DateTimeOffset | When using EXPIRABLE Mode, specifies the date time in a format parsable with `DateTimeOffset.TryParse` | ✅ |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| ExpirationDateTime | DateTimeOffset | When using EXPIRABLE Mode, specifies the date and time in a format parsable with `DateTimeOffset.TryParse` | ✅ |
```
Either datetime or date and time

### ColorPicker

| Name | Type | Description | Available |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Enabled | Bool | The enabled state for this utility | ✅ |
| ActivationShortcut | HotkeySettings | Customize the shortcut to activate this module | ✅ |
| CopiedColorRepresentation | String | The default color representation to be used. Example :"HEX" | ✅ |

> | ActivationAction | ColorPickerActivationAction | Possible values: OpenEditor OpenColorPickerAndThenEditor OpenOnlyColorPicker  | ✅ |

Reviewer: Comma-separate values
```suggestion
| ActivationAction | ColorPickerActivationAction | Possible values: OpenEditor, OpenColorPickerAndThenEditor, OpenOnlyColorPicker. | ✅ |
```

| VisibleColorFormats | — | — | ❌ |
| ShowColorName | Boolean | This will show the name of the color when picking a color | ✅ |

> Note: Configuring custom color formats through DSC is not supported yet.

Reviewer: Do you want to format this as a NOTE to highlight it?
```suggestion
> [NOTE]
> Configuring custom color formats through DSC is not yet supported.
```

| FancyzonesZoneHighlightColor | String | If not using FancyzonesSystemTheme, highlight color to use in #FFFFFFFF format | ✅ |
| FancyzonesHighlightOpacity | Int | Zone opacity in percentage | ✅ |
| FancyzonesEditorHotkey | KeyboardKeys | Customize the shortcut to activate this module | ✅ |
| FancyzonesWindowSwitching | Bool | Switch between windows in the current zone | ✅ |
| FancyzonesNextTabHotkey | KeyboardKeys | Next window shortcut | ✅ |
| FancyzonesPrevTabHotkey | KeyboardKeys | Previous window shortcut | ✅ |
| FancyzonesExcludedApps | String | '\r'-separated list of executable names to exclude from snapping | ✅ |
| FancyzonesBorderColor | String | If not using FancyzonesSystemTheme, border color to use in #FFFFFFFF format | ✅ |
| FancyzonesInActiveColor | String | If not using FancyzonesSystemTheme, inactive color to use in #FFFFFFFF format | ✅ |
| FancyzonesNumberColor | String | If not using FancyzonesSystemTheme, number color to use in #FFFFFFFF format | ✅ |
| FancyzonesSystemTheme | Bool | Whether to use system theme for zone appearance | ✅ |
| FancyzonesShowZoneNumber | Bool | Whether to show zone number | ✅ |

> Note: Configuring layouts through DSC is not supported yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [NOTE]
> Configuring layouts through DSC is not yet supported.
```

### FileLocksmith

| Name | Type | Description | Available |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Enabled | Bool | The enabled state for this utility | ✅ |
| ExtendedContextMenuOnly | Bool | Show File Locksmith in extended context menu only or in default context menu as well | ✅ |

### FindMyMouse

| Name | Type | Description | Available |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Enabled | Bool | The enabled state for this utility | ✅ |
| ActivationMethod | Int | Activation method index | ✅ |
| ActivationShortcut | HotkeySettings | Custom activation shortcut when using Custom for ActivationMethod | ✅ |
| DoNotActivateOnGameMode | Bool | Disable activation shortcut when Game Mode is on | ✅ |

> | BackgroundColor | String | Background color in #FFFFFFFF format | ✅ |

Reviewer: I like to use code formatting for colors so they stand out: `#FFFFFFFF`, but it's up to you if you'd like to change all the instances on this page.

| AdditionalLinesPosition | HostsAdditionalLinesPosition | Possible values: Top Bottom  | ✅ |
| Encoding | HostsEncoding | Possible values: Utf8 Utf8Bom  | ✅ |

### ImageResizer

| Name | Type | Description | Available |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Enabled | Bool | The enabled state for this utility | ✅ |
| ImageresizerSelectedSizeIndex | Int | Default size preset index | ✅ |
| ImageresizerShrinkOnly | Bool | Make pictures smaller but not larger | ✅ |
| ImageresizerReplace | Bool | Overwrite files | ✅ |
| ImageresizerIgnoreOrientation | Bool | Ignore the orientation of pictures | ✅ |
| ImageresizerJpegQualityLevel | Int | JPEG quality level in percentage | ✅ |
| ImageresizerPngInterlaceOption | Int | PNG interlacing option index | ✅ |
| ImageresizerTiffCompressOption | Int | Tiff compression index | ✅ |
| ImageresizerFileName | String | This format is used as the filename for resized images  | ✅ |
| ImageresizerSizes | — | — | ❌ |
| ImageresizerKeepDateModified | Bool | Remove metadata that doesn't affect rendering | ✅ |
| ImageresizerFallbackEncoder | String | Fallback encoder to use | ✅ |
| ImageresizerCustomSize | — | — | ❌ |

> Note: Configuring custom sizes through DSC is not supported yet.

Reviewer: More notes to format here and below.

### MousePointerCrosshairs

| Name | Type | Description | Available |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Enabled | Bool | The enabled state for this utility | ✅ |
| ActivationShortcut | HotkeySettings | Customize the shortcut to show/hide the crosshairs | ✅ |
| CrosshairsColor | String | Crosshairs color in #FFFFFFFF | ✅ |
| CrosshairsOpacity | Int | Crosshairs opacity in percentage | ✅ |
| CrosshairsRadius | Int | Crosshairs center radius in pixels | ✅ |
| CrosshairsThickness | Int | Crosshairs thickness in pixels | ✅ |
| CrosshairsBorderColor | String | Crosshairs border color in #FFFFFFFF format | ✅ |
| CrosshairsBorderSize | Int | Crosshairs border size in pixels | ✅ |
| CrosshairsAutoHide | Bool | Automatically hide crosshairs when the mouse pointer is hidden | ✅ |
| CrosshairsIsFixedLengthEnabled | Bool | Fix crosshairs length | ✅ |
| CrosshairsFixedLength | Int | Crosshairs fixed length in pixels | ✅ |
| AutoActivate | Bool | Automatically activate on utility startup | ✅ |

### MouseWithoutBorders

| Name | Type | Description | Available |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Enabled | Bool | The enabled state for this utility | ✅ |

> | ShowOriginalUI | Boolean | show the original Mouse Without Borders UI | ✅ |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| ShowOriginalUI | Boolean | Show the original Mouse Without Borders UI. | ✅ |
```

| LockMachineShortcut | HotkeySettings | Shortcut to lock all machines | ✅ |
| ReconnectShortcut | HotkeySettings | Shortcut to try reconnecting | ✅ |
| Switch2AllPCShortcut | HotkeySettings | Shortcut to switch to multiple machine mode | ✅ |
| Name2IP | String | IP address mapping | ✅ |

### PastePlain

| Name | Type | Description | Available |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Enabled | Bool | The enabled state for this utility | ✅ |
| ActivationShortcut | HotkeySettings | Customize the shortcut to activate this module | ✅ |

### Peek

| Name | Type | Description | Available |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Enabled | Bool | The enabled state for this utility | ✅ |
| ActivationShortcut | HotkeySettings | Customize the shortcut to activate this module | ✅ |
| AlwaysRunNotElevated | Bool | Always run not elevated, even when PowerToys is elevated | ✅ |
| CloseAfterLosingFocus | Bool | Automatically close the Peek window after it loses focus | ✅ |

### PowerAccent

PowerAccent is the internal name for Quick Accent.

| Name | Type | Description | Available |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Enabled | Bool | The enabled state for this utility | ✅ |

> | ActivationKey | PowerAccentActivationKey | Possible values: LeftRightArrow Space Both  | ✅ |

Reviewer: Comma-separate values.

| DoNotActivateOnGameMode | Boolean | Disable activation shortcut when Game Mode is on | ✅ |
| ToolbarPosition | String | Toolbar position index | ✅ |
| InputTime | Int | Input time delay in milliseconds | ✅ |
| SelectedLang | String | A character set to use | ✅ |
| ExcludedApps | String | '\r'-separated list of executable names to to prevent module activation if they're in a foreground | ✅ |
| ShowUnicodeDescription | Boolean | Show the Unicode code and name of the currently selected character | ✅ |
| SortByUsageFrequency | Boolean | Sort characters by usage frequency | ✅ |
| StartSelectionFromTheLeft | Boolean | Start selection from the left | ✅ |

### PowerLauncher

PowerLaucher is the internal name for PowerToys Run.

| Name | Type | Description | Available |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Enabled | Bool | The enabled state for this utility | ✅ |
| OpenPowerLauncher | HotkeySettings | Customize the shortcut to activate the module | ✅ |
| IgnoreHotkeysInFullscreen | Boolean | Ignore shortcuts in fullscreen mode | ✅ |
| ClearInputOnLaunch | Boolean | Clear the previous query on launch | ✅ |
| TabSelectsContextButtons | Boolean | Tab through context buttons | ✅ |

> | Theme | Theme | Possible values: System Light Dark HighContrastOne HighContrastTwo HighContrastBlack HighContrastWhite  | ✅ |

Reviewer: Comma-separate values.

| TitleFontSize | Int32 | Text size in points | ✅ |
| Position | StartupPosition | Possible values: Cursor PrimaryMonitor Focus  | ✅ |
| UseCentralizedKeyboardHook | Boolean | Use centralized keyboard hook | ✅ |
| SearchQueryResultsWithDelay | Boolean | Input Smoothing | ✅ |
| SearchInputDelay | Int32 | Immediate plugins delay in milliseconds | ✅ |
| SearchInputDelayFast | Int32 | Background execution plugins delay in milliseconds | ✅ |
| SearchClickedItemWeight | Int32 | Selected item weight | ✅ |
| SearchQueryTuningEnabled | Boolean | Results order tuning | ✅ |

> | SearchWaitForSlowResults | Boolean | Wait on slower plugin results before selecting top item in results | ✅ |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| SearchWaitForSlowResults | Boolean | Wait for slower plugin results before selecting top item in results | ✅ |
```

| IsGlobal | Boolean | Whether the results for this plugin are shown in the global results |
| ActionKeyword | String | Configure the action keyword of the plugin |
| WeightBoost | Int | The weight modifier to help in ordering the results for this plugin |

Note: Configuring additional properties of plugins is not yet supported through DSC.

### PowerOcr

PowerOcr is the internal name for Text Extractor.

| Name | Type | Description | Available |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Enabled | Bool | The enabled state for this utility | ✅ |
| ActivationShortcut | HotkeySettings | Customize the shortcut to activate this module | ✅ |
| PreferredLanguage | String | Should match the full name of one of the languages installed in the system. Example: "English (United States)" | ✅ |

### PowerPreview

| Name | Type | Description | Available |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| EnableSvgPreview | Boolean | Scalable Vector Graphics Preview Handler Enabled state | ✅ |
| SvgBackgroundColorMode | Int | Color mode index | ✅ |
| SvgBackgroundSolidColor | String | When using Solid color SvgBackgroundColorMode, specifies the color in #FFFFFFFF format | ✅ |

> | SvgBackgroundCheckeredShade | Int | | When using Checkered pattern SvgBackgroundColorMode, specifies the shade index | ✅ |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| SvgBackgroundCheckeredShade | Int | When using Checkered pattern SvgBackgroundColorMode, specifies the shade index | ✅ |
```
